I mentioned yesterday in the post below that I’d soon be participating in the next discussion group following the Platonic Space Symposium.
That next discussion was earlier today. You can watch it below:
I enjoyed it immensely, and wrote up some preliminary reflections below based on my comments.
Michael Levin and Hananel Hazan will be trying to create a typology of the variety of views contributed to the Symposium. In our discussion, Timothy Jackson preliminarily proposed a fourfold typology of 1) mechanical philosophy, 2) Platonism, 3) neo-Darwinism, and 4) speculative Darwinism (generalizing variation-and-selection beyond biology). Each offers a somewhat different answer to the question of whether “forms” are discovered or invented.
I suggested we might even simplify Tim’s fourfold scheme down to Platonism vs Darwinism. The mechanical philosophy, rooted in the determinism of Newtonian mathematical laws of physics, and neo-Darwinism, with its story about genetic molecules encoding phenotype determining “information,” both strike me as degraded or implicit Platonisms, because they smuggle in something very much like pre-given forms. Although he did not himself see how evolution might apply beyond the biosphere to the cosmos at large (he famously references “the fixed law of gravity” in the final pages of Origin), Darwin is the real alternative to Plato. He gave pride of place to variation, allowing the variety of special forms to be accounted for as historically accumulated through variation and selection.
“There is grandeur in this view of life, with its several powers, having been originally breathed into a few forms or into one; and that, whilst this planet has gone cycling on according to the fixed law of gravity, from so simple a beginning endless forms most beautiful and most wonderful have been, and are being, evolved.”
I also tried to loosen the reflexive allergy to “Platonism” among many empirical scientists by reminding that Plato’s dialogues don’t hand down a single doctrine. The sharpest criticisms of Plato’s theory of forms are elaborated in Plato’s dialogues.
For my part, I refuse what I take to be a forced choice between “variation first” and “invariance first.” If variation is to yield anything significant, it needs seeds of invariance. Some forms may be genuinely or at the very least practically invariant (from our perspective as observers), enabling a selection process through which other more contingent forms can emerge historically. I want it both ways!: an account of endless emergent forms most beautiful (in Whitehead’s terms, novel societies sheltering actual occasions of experience capable of entertaining novel complex propositions) that doesn’t deny but may even metaphysically require the reality of invariances as a source of relevant selection. You could call my position Evolutionary Platonism.1
My admission above that form may be invariant only relative to our perspective as observers speaks to David Resnik’s apropos mention of Kant during our discussion. Kant’s revolutionary transcendental philosophy argues that whatever reality may be “in itself,” any reality that can appear for us must already be structured by conditions of possible experience: forms of intuition (space and time) and categories (causality, substance, etc.). These are not extra entities in a Platonic heaven, but the enabling invariances of intelligibility, what makes a world count as a world for finite knowers like us. Kant’s a prioris are, at minimum, practically invariant from the standpoint of observers embedded in a cosmos canalized by ancient regularities. We never meet “pure variation” but only variation against a background of habits, constraints, and repeatable relations that make discrimination, memory, inference, and valuation, etc., possible at all.
Schelling’s Naturphilosophie already does what would be required decades later by Darwin: he evolutionizes Kant. The transcendental structure of human Reason cannot just be inserted into the mind of man from nowhere. Schelling traces its genesis in a dynamic series of stages in nature itself. The transcendental reflexivity of human consciousness becomes a living achievement of nature’s self-organizing history, with mind as a higher potency of nature reflecting on its own creative intelligibility, rather than a disembodied observer imposing a fixed set of rules upon a passive material world.
Tim and I had been talking offline before this discussion about the limits of natural language and the need for formalization. As the discussion wrapped up, I emphasized that Plato doesn’t simply translate myth into logic. His dialogues play dialectic and myth off each other: dialectic pushes the intellect to its limits in aporia, then myth renders imaginatively what reason cannot grasp abstractly. However far science and computation may take us, we still need stories about what the formalisms mean for our human self-understanding.
As we wrapped up, the discussion shifted to the different sorts of explanations that science might seek of a given or of various multi-level phenomena. This reminded me of Aristotle’s four aitia, a term often translated as “cause” but which means something more like “reasons” or “modes of explanation.” Material, efficient, formal, and final modes of explanation were enumerated by Aristotle as being required for a comprehensive understanding of something. There’s no question that Aristotle was wrong about a lot of things (eg, uniform acceleration, women as deformed men, natural slaves, etc.). But it seems to me that much of contemporary complex systems science is rediscovering emergent evolutionary versions of what he called entelechy. There are no static, pre-given, externally imposed forms in Aristotle’s metaphysics: entelechy refers to the condition of something that is not merely potential but actively realizing its form. Nowadays, systems scientists might refer to dynamic attractors instead.
My final contribution was to differentiate metaphysics from the special sciences (without thereby making them unaccountable to one another). The sciences offer domain specific explanations keyed to precisely isolated problems, while metaphysics seeks descriptive generalization across such domains, serving as the “critic of abstraction” (Whitehead) by reminding the special sciences to avoid the temptation to assert one cause to rule them all.
1
In Process and Reality (p. 91-4), Whitehead contrasts Newton’s Scholium with Plato’s Timaeus to argue that, judged in light of contemporary evolutionary cosmology, Plato is actually the more modern of the two. Whitehead treats our current cosmic epoch as a vast society of nested societies (electronic, protonic, etc.) whose apparent “laws” are in fact statistical regularities emergent from historically achieved patterns of social order and reproduction, shot through with arbitrariness and failure, and always unstable enough at the edges to be on the verge of realizing new orders. Newton’s Scholium, by contrast, presupposes fully formed space, time, matter, and forces, all ready-made for an initial divine shove, with no hint of natura naturans, no evolution of matter, and no sense of the limited applicability of its effective abstractions. Plato’s Timaeus, though scientifically superseded in its details, is philosophically deeper because it links the behaviour of things to their formal natures, treats sharply distinguished kinds as arising from underlying molecular and mathematical structures, and imagines the current world-order as emerging from an antecedent chaos through the establishment of new dominant societies of forms. For Whitehead, this Platonic picture of cosmogenesis as the incoming of a certain type of order that inaugurates a cosmic epoch is far closer to an evolutionary universe of changing laws, quantum discontinuities, and emergent species than Newton’s static, divinely designed system.
No posts